# The Big Five personality traits and brain arousal in the resting state            

This page contains the analysis scripts referring to our manuscript entitled 'The Big Five personality traits and brain arousal in the resting state'. We provide a reproducable and portable R environment, analysis scripts, and a synthetic datasets to re-run our code.

## Abstract
Based on Eysenck’s neuropsychological trait theory, brain arousal has long been considered an encouraging biological candidate that may explain individual differences in human personality. Yet, results from empirical studies remained inconclusive. Notably, the vast majority of published results have been derived from small samples, and EEG alpha power has usually served as ex-clusive indicator for brain arousal. In this study, we selected N = 468 individuals of the LIFE-Adult cohort and investigated the associations between the Big Five personality traits and brain arousal by using the low-resolution electromagnetic tomography-based analysis tool VIGALL. Our analyses revealed that subjects	 who reported higher levels of extraversion and openness to experience, respectively, exhibited lower levels of brain arousal in the resting state. Bayesian and frequentist analysis results were especially convincing for openness to expe-rience. Among the lower-order personality traits, we obtained strongest evidence for neuroticism facet ‘impulsivity’ and reduced brain arousal. We regard these findings as well in line with the postulations of Eysenck and Zuckerman and consistent with the assumptions of the ‘arousal reg-ulation model’. Our results also agree with meta-analytically derived effect sizes in the field of individual differences research, highlighting the need for large studies with at least several hun-dreds of subjects.

Keywords: Arousal, Big Five, EEG, Resting State, VIGALL, Extraversion, Neuroticism, Impulsivity


## Figures
[Fig. 1](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/timeseries.png) - Time-courses of EEG-vigilance during the 20-minute eyes-closed resting-state condition stratified by groups scoring low vs. high on the respective Big Five scale<br>
[Fig. 2](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/boxplots.png) - Boxplots showing the differences in EEG-vigilance (as indicated by variable ‘slope index’) as a function of Big Five personality trait<br>
[Fig. 3](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/qqplot_full.png) - Permutation-based qq-plots showing the distribution of observed vs. expected p-values for NEO personality traits and facets (sex and age-normalized T-Scores)<br>

[Fig. S1](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/power.png) - Power analysis results<br>
[Fig. S2](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/intercorr_facets.html) - NEO personality facets (T-scores) - Cronbach’s Alpha and intercorrelations (interactive plot)<br>
[Fig. S3](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/qqplot_partial.png) - Permutation-based qq-plots showing the distribution of observed vs. expected p-values for NEO personality traits and facets (sex and age-normalized T-Scores) after adjusting for covariates<br>

### Figure captions
[Fig. 1](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/timeseries.png) - Time-courses of EEG-vigilance during the 20-minute eyes-closed resting-state condition stratified by groups scoring low vs. high on the respective Big Five scale (median-split, i.e., subjects with scores in the lower vs. upper half of the ascending distribution are compared). Time-courses reflect simple moving averages (SMA), i.e., every data point represents an averaged 61-second in-terval of EEG-vigilance (data point in time ± 30 seconds). Statistical analyses revealed significant associations between EEG-vigilance and both extraversion and openness to experience.<br>

[Fig. 2](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/boxplots.png) - Boxplots showing the differences in EEG-vigilance (as indicated by variable ‘slope index’) as a function of Big Five personality trait. Boxplots are stratified by groups scoring low vs. high on the respective Big Five scale (i.e., subjects with scores in the lower vs. upper half of the ascending distribution are compared). Boxes represent the interquartile range (data between the lower and upper quartile), with the horizontal line corresponding to the median. Whiskers extend to the fur-thest observation within 1.5 times the interquartile range from the lower and upper quartile. Dots represent single observations, jittered horizontally to avoid overplotting. Statistical analyses revealed significant associations between EEG-vigilance variable ‘slope index’ and both extraversion and openness to experience.<br>

[Fig. 3](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/qqplot_full.png) - Permutation-based qq-plot showing the observed p-values from the association analyses (blue circles) sorted from largest to smallest and plotted against the expected p-values under the null hypothesis. The solid diagonal line represents the mean expected p-values. The lower and upper bound of the grey area represent the 5th and 95th percentile (-log10 scale) of the expected p-values. Quantile-quantile plots show an excess of low p-values, suggesting that association analyses revealed overall stronger evidence than expected under the null hypothesis of no effect. (a) NEO personality traits (sex and age-normalized T-scores) (b) NEO personality facets (sex and age-normalized T-scores). <br>


[Fig. S1](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/power.pdf) - Power analysis results showing the probability (1-β) of associations to surpass the threshold of significance given true effect sizes ranging between ρ = 0.0 and ρ = 0.4 (with N = 468). The dotted curve shows the probability to reach nominal significance (α = 0.05, two-tailed). The solid curve shows the probability to reach the Bonferroni-corrected level of significance (α = 0.05/15, two-tailed). Power analysis was conducted using R package pwr v1.3-0 (Champely, 2020).<br>

[Fig. S2](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/intercorr_facets.html) - NEO personality facets - Cronbach’s α and intercorrelations. Only cells containing correlations with nominal significance (p < 0.05) have been assigned with colors of the blue and red color palette. Values of the main diagonal reflect the internal consistency as estimated using Cronbach’s α.<br>

[Fig. S3](https://pjawinski.github.io/bigv/code/figures/qqplot_partial.png) - Permutation-based qq-plot showing the observed p-values from the association analyses (blue circles) sorted from largest to smallest and plotted against the expected p-values under the null hypothesis. The solid diagonal line represents the mean expected p-values. The lower and upper bound of the grey area represent the 5th and 95th percentile (-log10 scale) of the expected p-values. A NEO personality traits (sex and age-normalized T-scores) adjusted by sex, age, and time of EEG assessment. B NEO personality facets (sex and age-normalized T-scores) adjusted by sex, age, and time of EEG assessment.<br>